>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
And this is "Mystery Teachings."
Have you ever experienced
the hairs on your arm
or the back of your
neck standing up
signaling an intuitive hit?
Or perhaps, your heart
skips a beat or your palms
started to sweat?
What controls this process?
To explore that, let's
take a closer look
at the parts of our brain said
to be the seat of consciousness
and intuition.
This area is made of
a few core structures
that bridge between the limbic
system and the brainstem.
Here, we're getting into
the oldest and deepest parts
of the brain where
activities are mostly
unconscious and instinctual.
But we can become
conscious of them.
Sensory information that
comes up through the brainstem
is processed here
and then relayed
to the higher
parts of the brain.
By bridging our conscious
awareness into the old brain,
we have the
opportunity to master
our instinctual and
intuitive responses.
When we have greater
awareness of both
the physical and
spiritual signals coming
through our senses,
our perceptions expand.
Our ability to perceive becomes
sharper and more accurate.
Not only can we better discern
the stimulus within our body,
but also where that
stimulus is coming from.
But in order to have optimal
functioning of our intuition,
there's some cleanup to be done.
With greater
conscious awareness,
we have the opportunity to deal
with the unconscious reactions
that sabotage us.
We can reprogram the
functions of the old brain
so that its reactive
processes work
with us rather than against us.
Let's take a closer
look at the structures
that we're dealing with here.
The key structures that bridge
between the limbic system
and the old brain include
the pituitary gland,
the pineal gland, and
the hypothalamus gland.
These three glands sit at the
very top of the brainstem.
And they work together with the
hippocampus and the amygdala
to send sensory information
up to the higher cortex.
Now, when we have a
physical body sensation,
that feeling comes up from the
body through the brainstem.
We might experience it as an
increase in our heart rate,
a change in our breath,
a tingling sensation,
a shift in our body
temperature, or the like.
All of these things are governed
by the old brain's reticular
activating system.
And this is a small part
of the brain located just
above where the spinal cord
attaches to the brainstem.
It's the gatekeeper
of information
between our body's sensory
systems and the conscious mind.
But for the most
part, people don't
know how to stimulate their
old brain in the proper ways.
As a result, we're not tapping
into its full capacity.
Why is this?
Well typically, it's because
people are seeking stimulation
from things outside
of themselves.
There is a network of
structures within this part
of the brain that are known
as the reward and pleasure
centers.
Instead of building
the proper circuitry
to access that
pleasure from within,
we're often looking
for something external
to get us there.
When the reward
centers are stimulated,
dopamine and other
neurotransmitters and peptides
are released into the body.
Our subconscious impulses are
to keep the chemicals flowing.
And this is what creates
addictive patterns.
Another key structure
that plays in here
is the amygdala, which
governs our fear response.
If danger is perceived,
we go into survival mode
of self-preservation.
Our body responds with increased
heart rate, sweaty palms,
and other physical
body sensations
that signal a potential threat.
These reactions
happen unconsciously
as part of our deep brain
processing and sense
of survival.
We see mainstream
media and politicians
target this area quite a bit by
feeding us with drama and fear.
This fear mode puts
our focus on a bad guy.
And it provokes separation.
These dynamics
lead to imbalances,
making it even easier
for us to be manipulated,
as we bounced back and
forth between survival mode
and pleasure seeking.
It's one of the ways we're
programmed by our society,
creating the subconscious
patterns that drive us.
How do we stop this cycle?
How do we take back
control of our lives?
To get out of autopilot and
back into the driver's seat,
we must reprogram
our old brain system
and the signals it is
sending to our limbic system.
To do that, some of the
most effective methods
we have are deep
meditation and deep ritual
work where we spend
a prolonged amount
of time in theta brainwave
states of three to seven Hertz.
Theta waves are generated
by the hippocampus
deep within the brain.
And as we drop into
that deep theta state,
our spiritual
connection is enhanced.
We become more aware of the
subtle sensations of the body
and open up to receive
intuitive insights.
We may experience
profound visions here
and feel a sense of
connection with the universe.
But typically, it's
just a transition state
that we spend only a
short amount of time in.
But when we learn to meditate,
however, and we get good at it,
we can prolong
our time in theta,
bringing ourselves into a more
balanced and renewed state.
Our goal when meditating
should be to sustain theta
as long as we can.
It takes practice to stay in
theta without falling asleep.
And the body may
sleep, but the mind
remains awake, not the ego
mind, but the part of our mind
that connects to
the higher realms.
It's a kind of awareness where
there's no thought involved.
And in this state the
body's rejuvenated
and our consciousness expands.
Theta brainwaves sweep
up from the hippocampus,
they stimulate the pleasure
centers of the brain,
and then this releases
molecules that
bring us into an experience
of gentle euphoria.
This wave sweeps up from the
deep brain, moves to the higher
areas, then forward to
the prefrontal cortex,
and then back and down again.
And a synchronized
theta wave brings us
into a whole brain state.
It also stimulates
the thalamus gland,
which regulates our
sleep-wake cycles
and directly connects to
the brainstem's reticular
activating system.
The thalamus is thought
to play an important role
in conscious awareness.
The thalamus also
directly connects
to the pineal
gland, which is said
to be the seat of
consciousness within the brain.
The pineal gland controls
melatonin and serotonin
production, as well as
our circadian rhythms,
which are governed
by light exposure.
So it's linked to
the day-night cycle.
And when we're
exposed to light, it
stimulates that pineal gland
and serotonin production
kicks in to keep us
active and aware.
And this helps us to be
more focused and alert.
But when we're in the dark
and the lights are out,
that's when melatonin
production kicks in,
triggering a sleepy
or restful state.
And in this state, we may
experience inner visions
and dreams.
When we are deeply
relaxed, we go
into what is called a
trophotropic state, where
healing accelerates
within the body.
And when it comes to achieving
balance or homeostasis,
there is one other important
gland to mention here.
That's the pituitary
gland that sits
behind the bridge of our
nose or the third eye point.
The pituitary
gland sends signals
to the rest of the
endocrine system, which
produces the various
hormones of our body.
So the pituitary gland is
like the main frame control
center, determining which
hormones get produced
and in what amounts, thus
regulating our body's level
of homeostasis.
Now, metaphysically,
the endocrine system
is also directly connected to
our chakras, the major energy
centers of our central core.
And it can be thought of as our
body's own inner alchemy lab.
The master glands that
control all the operations
of this alchemy are the
pineal and pituitary glands.
Learning how to
properly stimulate them
while also keeping
them in balance
is crucial to our
overall well-being.
And as we become aware of
these deep brain functions,
we can start to adjust
our behaviors in order
to bring greater
balance into our system.
Once the system is in
balance, we can then further
tap into these centers
of consciousness
and expand our ability to
cultivate transcendence states
from within.
How do we do this?
In ancient times, initiates in
both the Western and Eastern
Mystery School traditions
went through a type
of sensory deprivation
process to activate
these mystical experiences.
For example, they'd
go into a cave
to meditate as an initiatory
process, lasting several days
or even weeks,
maybe even months,
depending on the tradition.
And this immersion
into the dark is
something we see in many
traditions around the world.
What happens during this
process is fascinating.
As they immerse themselves
into the cave with no light,
they then willfully work
to suppress their senses
of the outer world.
Even the sense of
smell would fade
into the background in time.
They would have very little
auditory input, maybe just
the sound of their
own breath, which
brings them even more inside.
The only sensory
inputs remaining
would be breathing
and gentle movement.
And these are related to the
deepest parts of the brain.
So in a sense, this is quieting
the upper regions of the brain,
while keeping the deepest
parts of the brain awake.
And because they're in the
dark for extended periods,
the serotonin
production would be
suppressed while the
melatonin production would
go into surplus.
The current hypothesis is that
once they got enough rest,
the body would realize
that it doesn't
need all this melatonin.
So what happens?
Well, it starts
to polymerize it,
combining the molecules
of melatonin together.
And this produces more
complex molecules.
And ultimately, it comes
into the DMT molecule.
But we have to be careful here.
There is a big difference
between flooding
the brain with a chemical
from an outside source
versus building up the inner
pathways to alchemically
produce it within
ourselves indigenously.
When we build up the
gateway from within,
that gateway stays open.
We establish the proper
channels and wiring
within the brain to sustain
this access to spiritual vision.
When it comes to
sustained access
and true spiritual
mastery, it can
be counter-productive
to shock our system
by forcing the experience
from outside chemicals
are psychoactive substances.
The inner alchemy work is key
to maintaining the balance
and integrating the experience
in a sustainable way.
Today, we can use breath
work, chants, and techniques
for knowing where
to place the tongue
to stimulate this naturally.
By building up the
proper pathways within,
our whole center of
awareness shifts.
And when we do the work within,
we can sustain and access it
more easily.
So how do we bring our
system into balance?
Let's return to the
hypothalamus, pituitary,
and pineal glands for a moment.
These three glands are known
as the mystical centers
within the brain.
And they form a
triangular pattern
within the central core.
Not only do they receive
signals from physical stimuli,
but they also process
spiritual energy
coming down from the
higher vibrational levels.
Together, these three glands
regulate our homeostasis.
And this is key.
Homeostasis is the
state that we want
to be in to access our
sense of inner peace.
It's a state where
everything is good
and where we know within
every cell of our being
that we are perfect
and we are divine.
That's the homeostasis
we are meant to be in.
But if we're flooding the
body with chemicals trying
to force or shortcut
the experience,
we're not going to
reach that homeostasis.
Flooding our system takes
us into an extreme state
away from homeostasis.
On the other hand, practices
like meditation, qigong,
breath work, sacred
chants, and ritual
are all methods that can
more holistically move us
towards our homeostasis.
They help us to
gradually build up
those proper pathways
within our body
and rewire our brain for more
optimal and interconnected
functioning.
What does it take to rewire
and gain greater self
mastery of our old brain?
Well, first of all, it
takes self-awareness.
Most people aren't aware of
the stimuli being processed
through the old brain.
It happens unconsciously.
Yet, it affects the
choices we make.
Without realizing it,
we make snap judgments.
This happens through a
process the scientists call
thin slicing.
There can be a certain
level of accuracy with this.
For example, in Malcolm
Gladwell's book "Blink,"
he reports how in
just a few seconds
we can thin slice situations
with about 80% accuracy.
What we need to watch out
for our personal filters
and biases.
When we properly train
ourselves to be more self-aware,
we can better understand
where those judgments
are coming from.
We can also become
more conscious
of the body's signals.
Much of this has to do
with paying attention
to the subtle details.
The more we condition
ourselves to notice the details
and pay attention,
the more this level
of awareness becomes
innate and automatic.
This self work is important.
We have to clear
these old patterns
so that they don't
distort or block us
from recognizing
what's really going on.
Our accuracy of
perception drastically
improves when we are not only
aware of the signal itself,
but also where it's coming from.
What do I mean by where
a signal's coming from?
Well, for example, we
can ask, is this stimulus
coming from inside of me?
Or does it originate
outside in the environment?
If it's from outside,
what's the source of it?
If it's from
inside, Is it coming
from my ego, or my subconscious,
or my mind, or my soul?
And what is it that I'm meant
to be paying attention to?
When we can identify
where it's coming from,
we become much more clear and
less susceptible to distortion
from bias.
So there's a two-prong
approach to this path.
First is to do the healing
work needed to clear away
our distortions and biases.
Second is to rewire ourselves
to sustain conscious awareness
and choice in how we respond
to our deep body brain signals.
What do you suppose is
the key to increasing
our level of awareness
and maintaining it?
Typically, when people
are asked this question,
they come up with a
wide variety of answers,
even though the answer
becomes obvious to us
once it's revealed.
The key rests in a
certain kind of attitude.
And this attitude affects
so much in our lives.
It determines whether we
are living in mediocrity
or whether we are
truly thriving in life
and achieving our
greater potential.
So here's the secret formula.
Awareness equals caring.
Think about it.
When we care about
someone or something,
we pay more attention to it.
When we care, the
details matter.
When we care, we
make more effort.
take the actions
needed to make a difference.
When we care, our
hearts open up.
And when our hearts are
open, we are more in tune
with our body as
well as our spirit.
Yes, my friends,
awareness is caring.
So if I could offer one
piece of advice here,
it would be to eliminate
the phrase "I don't care"
from your vocabulary.
It's OK to say something
like, "I'm not attached."
But if you want to
rise above mediocrity
and start to thrive in life,
then reframe your attitude
from not caring to I care.
The world will become a much
better place when we all
start to care more again.
Once we start shifting
into caring more,
how do we then rewire
ourselves to sustain
our new level of awareness?
This step requires building
bridges between the old brain
and the higher
regions of the brain.
We must repair and
rewire those areas
where we've stored negative
patterns or trauma.
When we do this work,
our thin slicing
becomes much more accurate.
We can work our way towards
90% to 99% accuracy.
We'll always have our
judgments and our flaws,
so long as we're in
this physical body.
But we definitely
have the ability
to get to 95%
accuracy or better.
The bottom line is that
we have the ability
to cultivate this
experience within.
When we do this
from within, we are
in control of the experience.
And it becomes something
we can sustain.
When we do the work to open
those gates, we find the way
and can then always open
it from within ourselves
whenever we need to.
We realize that we are the key.
We are the gate.
And in the Mystery
Schools, we've
always taught that the
full powers of heaven
and the universe are within us.
And if we are this eternal
being with access to the quantum
field, and yet we choose
to give our power away
to something outside of us, then
we're diminishing ourselves.
For us to have self mastery, we
can't be giving our power away.
Various spiritual traditions
may hand down tools and methods.
But it's up to each
of us to pick those
up and work with them.
And it takes discipline to
achieve our full potential.
It takes devotion to
fulfill our purpose.
How do we pursue self mastery?
Here, we come to what I
call the doing bridge.
This is the key to
rewiring the old brain.
It's all about what we do,
meaning our daily actions.
The doing bridge is built on
ritualized behavior and habits.
It's our way of being.
And it comes through
integrating skills
until they become second nature,
like learning to ride a bike.
It takes time and practice
to learn those motor skills
and balance.
But once you know, you know.
This is how we program the
old brain, through repetition,
until a pattern become
so integrated that it's
second nature.
We get to the point
where we don't even
think about it anymore.
As we take these
skills and master them,
it frees up higher centers of
the brain to learn new skills.
The integrated learning
then becomes automatic.
This is how we build
our base for life.
We're building our
foundation here.
And we construct it through
how we live and operate
on a daily basis.
Now, in the mystical
tradition of kabbalah,
the sphere on the tree
of life called yesod,
is associated with
this foundation.
Its core essence is
captured in the affirmation.
In thought, in word, in deed,
I rest my life from day to day
upon the sure foundation
of eternal being.
This tells us that what
we do, how we think,
and the words we use on
a regular daily basis
reveals our
subconscious patterning.
This foundation
relates to the wiring
of our old brain, which filters
what stimuli we perceive.
Our subconscious
patterning determines
what we become aware
of and how we react.
In the universe of kabbalah,
we reprogram the mind,
bringing light into
the subconscious
so that we can have
more full awareness.
And ultimately, what we want
is to have our base for life
resting upon our
eternal being, to live
as our full, divine self.
That is what creates
the strongest
foundation for our life.
Yet, to get there, we
must unwind and peel away
the layers of faulty
programming, beliefs,
and attachments.
How do we reprogram
our foundation?
It's done through
consistency and repetition.
It takes time and discipline.
But it's worth it.
When we have a
strong foundation,
we're more supported to fulfill
our potential and purpose.
And we're less likely
to sabotage ourselves
in the process.
Self-sabotage kicks
in when there's
dysfunction in our foundation.
Is our foundation strong
enough to hold us in balance,
especially when we
hit our stress points
or when fear comes up?
If we want to understand
where and why things go wrong,
we need to look here.
This is at the core of how we
operate as physical beings.
You may know someone
who seems spiritual.
And they're really into
the philosophical ideas.
But they don't
seem to embody it.
Spirituality remains
just a concept
until we do the work
to heal at a core level
and repattern our life.
A big part of the work
is building a more sure
foundation.
It's about living
it and doing it.
It's how we live life every day.
The kingdom of spirit can become
embodied in our physical life
in its full capacity.
And how we achieve
that is by mastering
all aspects of our
physical experience
rather than just
trying to escape it.
So how do we get
started with this?
We can start by making
a list of our habits,
brainstorm everything
you do on a daily basis,
identify your routine,
not only in your actions,
but also your thoughts
and your words.
Then the next step is to look
at this list and identify
the habits that support you
and the ones that don't.
To get clear on what habits
are supportive or not, take
some time to think
about your goals,
the things you'd like
to accomplish in life,
or how you'd like your
daily experience to be.
Think about how you
want to experience life.
How does it feel?
Then take a look at the
patterns you've identified
that serve these goals.
And if you find a pattern
or habit that doesn't serve,
it's important to replace
it with something new.
Find something more
supportive and add
that in to reprogram
your routine.
Once you've identified the
changes you'd like to make,
the next step is to
really commit to yourself.
Nothing will change if we
don't take the steps to do it.
It's up to us to redirect
ourselves and create
a new pattern.
But the good news is that
it gets easier with time.
Research shows that,
on average, it's
about a two month period of
really putting in the effort
to do it daily before
a new habit is formed.
Consistency is the key
to reprogramming our life
patterns.
If we commit to new routine
and practice it maybe
at the same time every day
or in the same context,
we'll have much higher
chance of success.
And it's OK if we miss one
day, so long as we pick it
up again the next day and
the next several days.
The other key to
new habit formation
is to be specific in
the goal, as well as
devise a plan of exactly when
and where you will do it.
Over 90% of the
people who succeed
at implementing a new
routine are the ones who
create a specific plan
and follow through
on their intention,
meaning enter it
into your schedule, the actual
days, times, and locations
that you will commit to
doing that new behavior.
For example, I commit to
meditating twice a day
for 45 minutes starting at
5:00 AM at home and 1:00 PM
after lunch at work everyday.
Now, when we're talking
about a spiritual practice,
is it the same as creating
new physical habits?
Yes and no.
We can use similar principles.
But it goes beyond that.
That's because we're
bringing in spiritual energy.
And at certain points in
our spiritual practice,
we start to trigger
those pleasure centers
within the brain.
And this pleasure and
sharing your experience
increases our
desire to continue.
But we still have to be
consistent to maintain.
To work with this, do a 60 day
challenge to really implement
new changes into your life.
Or if working with
it twice a day,
you can reduce it to
maybe a 40 day challenge.
Once your goal and
plan are set, including
when and where, it's then
up to you to follow through.
Remember, we are
habitual beings.
Once the new pattern
is established,
it's easier to maintain it.
Those first 40 to 60
days are the hardest.
But after that, it gets easier.
To help with the
initial push, find
a rhythm that works for you
and establish your plan.
If you do it at the same
time or in the same sequence
or context, this also
supports our success.
Committing to a new daily habit
builds new neural circuitry
within the brain.
But what about deconstructing
the old habits that
aren't serving us?
Is there anything we can
do to aid the breakdown
of this old neural wiring?
This brings us back to our
theta meditation practice.
The most effective method for
pruning unused neural patterns
is through prolonged
meditation in a theta state.
When we access theta, we
go into a healing state,
balancing the parasympathetic
nervous system.
It's really important
for this process
to happen if we want to
rewire the old brain.
Often, our brain activity is
dominated by the upper regions
of the brain.
But when we sustain
a theta state,
it gives the deep brain
a chance to rewire.
Let's put this into
a practical exercise.
To start, we've
already established
a new daily practice and
committed to at least a 40
to 60 day challenge.
Now, we can bring in
breathing techniques
to support our effort,
to rewire and reprogram
these new daily actions.
We have everything
we need inside of us
to bring ourselves
into a theta state.
We don't really need binaural
beats or entrainment tools,
although they can be helpful.
But it's really a simple process
of deep, rhythmic breathing.
Start by breathing in
deeply through the nose
and pull the breath down to
the hara, just below the navel.
Then breathe out with a
strong, audible breath.
Repeat this several times,
breathing in through the nose,
out through the mouth.
This breathing technique
calms the nervous system
and helps to reduce stress.
As you maintain this
rhythmic breathing,
eventually you'll sink
deeper into a theta state.
As you go deeper,
let go of thought.
Let go of attachment.
Let it pass by your mind.
Allow yourself to be
carried deeper and deeper
into meditation, as you
focus only on your breath.
Eventually, you'll
enter the theta state.
You may experience inner
visions, like colors, symbols,
or sacred geometries.
And if these images
start appearing,
just witness them
like a daydream,
yet still keeping your
focus on the breath.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Make this a daily practice to
cultivate the theta brainwave
state.
Notice what happens when
you come into theta.
You may start getting
into that zone
where we begin to access
more spiritual energy
and a state of transcendence.
The goal is to sustain
this as long as possible.
Now, it may take
15 to 20 minutes
to start to relax enough
just to get into theta.
And once we move into
that theta state,
we then want to maintain
it for as long as we can
without falling asleep
or popping back out.
The more we practice
this, the longer
we'll be able to hold
it for ourselves.
And this opens the
pituitary and pineal glands.
The third eye opens.
And we start having
more spiritual visions
with our practice.
We're rewiring the brain
through this process
to be more aware of
spiritual energies.
Ancient hermetic
teachings-- again, they
tell us to withdraw into
yourself and it shall come.
Will it and it is so.
Make idle the senses of the body
and the Spirit will be born.
Join me again as we venture
further on our journey
to rewiring our
brain and body system
and exploring the
mind-heart connection
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of our human potential with
me in this episode of "Mystery
Teachings."